An induced [[topology]] is a topology defined
by asking that some map or collection of maps is [[Continuity (topology)|continuous]] wrt. the topology.
Formally, given set $X$, topological space $(Y, \tau')$, map $f : X \rightarrow Y$,
$$
\tau = \{f^{-1}(U) : U \in \tau'\}
$$
is a topology on $X$ called the topology induced by $f$.
Also called _initial_ topology (fi: lähtötopologia).

The "opposite" of this, where $X$ has a topology and $f$ induces one on $Y$,
is the [[co-induced topology]].

This topology makes $f$ continuous due to the characterization of continuity
(see [[Continuity (topology)#Alternative characterizations]])
which states that a map is continuous iff preimages of open sets are open.

The induced topology is the _coarsest_ topology on $X$ that makes $f$ continuous
because it contains exactly the sets needed to make every preimage of an open set open.

## Relative topology

$(X, \tau)$ a topological space, $A \subset X$.
Define the _inclusion map_ $\iota : A \rightarrow X$, $\iota(x) = x$.
The relative topology $\tau_A$ on $A$ is the topology induced by $\iota$,
equal to
$$
\tau_A = \{A \cap U : U \in \tau \}
$$

Example: $X = \mathbb{R}$ with standard topology, $A = [0, 1]$.
Now $[0, \frac{1}{2}[$ is open wrt. $\tau_A$ but not $\tau$.

## Multiple maps

If we have a family of topological spaces $(Y_i, \tau_i), i \in I$
and maps $f_i : X \rightarrow Y_i$
and would like all of these to be continuous,
then our induced topology $\tau$ must include at least
$$
\tau \supset \bigcup_{i \in I} \{f^{-1}(U) : U \in \tau_i\} =: \mathcal{S}
$$
however, this is not necessarily a topology
because it may not contain all unions of sets in it.
The way to obtain a topology containing all these sets
is to treat is as a [[Basis (topology)#Subbasis|subbasis]].

Definition: the topology generated by subbasis $\mathcal{S}$
is the topology on $X$ induced by the family of maps $f_i$.

## Product topology

Let $\prod_{i \in I}X_i$ be a [[product set]].
Consider projections $P_j : \prod_{i \in I}X_i \rightarrow X_j$, $P_j(x) = x_j$
(the $j$th coordinate of $x$).
The _product topology_ on $\prod_{i \in I}X_i$
is the topology induced by the projection maps $\{P_j : j \in I\}$.
A subbasis is given by
$$
\mathcal{S} = \{P^{-1}_j(U), U \in \tau_j, j \in I\}
$$

Example: $\mathbb{R}^2$ with standard topology.
The subbasis consists of horizontal and vertical strips
(preimages of projection to open intervals on both axes),
giving a topology with a basis of rectangles.

A basis for a general product topology is
$$
\mathcal{B} = \{\prod_{i \in I} U_i : U_i \in \tau_i, i \in I,
\quad \text{and } U_i \neq X_i \text{ for only finitely many }i \}
$$
i.e. all products containing one subset from each of the sets in the product
such that there are not infinitely many ones consisting of the entire set.
The last restriction is because the topology only needs to contain
finite intersections of the basis sets.

Example: if $(X, \tau_X), (Y, \tau_Y)$ are topological spaces, then
$$
\{U \times V : U \in \tau_X, V \in \tau_Y\}
$$
is a basis of the product topology on $X \times Y$.

### Lemma: Finitely many projections are proper subsets

$(X_i, \tau_i)$ topological spaces, $U \in \prod_{i \in I} X_i$ open
(wrt. product topology $\tau$).
Then $P_j(U) \neq X_j$ for finitely many $j \in I$.
###### Proof
$\tau$ has a basis $\mathcal{B}$ as defined previously.
For all $U \in \tau$ there is $B \in \mathcal{B}$ s.t. $B \subset U$ (by definition of basis).
$\implies P_j(B) \subset P_j(U)$ for all $j \in I$.
By definition of the product basis,
$P_j(B) \neq X_j$ for finitely many $j$ (in other words $j \in J$, $J$ finite).
Now if $j \in I \setminus J$, then $X_j = P_j(B) \subset P_j(U) \subset X_j \implies P_j(U) = X_j$.
######
As a result, in infinite-dimensional product spaces,
all open sets must have an infinite number
of coordinates where they project to the whole corresponding space.

### Lemma: Product of Hausdorff spaces

If $(X_i, \tau_i)$, $i \in I$ are Hausdorff, then $\prod_{i \in I} X_i$ is Hausdorff.

### Proposition: Countable product of metrizable spaces

If $(X_n, \tau_n)$, $n \in \mathbb{N}$ are metrizable,
then $\prod_{n=1}^{\infty} X_n$ is metrizable.

This does _not_ apply if the index set is infinite!
E.g. $[0, 1]^{[0, 1]}$ with product topology is not metrizable.

Example: Hilbert cube $[0, 1]^{\mathbb{N}}$
with the topology being the product of the relative topology from $\mathbb{R}$ on $[0, 1]$.
$[0, 1]^{\mathbb{N}}$ is [[Hausdorff space|Hausdorff]] and metrizable.
$]0, 1[^{\mathbb{N}}$ is _not_ open.

Example: $[0, 1]^{[0, 1]}$.
This is an infinite-dimensional space where a metric $d_{\infty}$ exists.
This metric induces a topology that is necessarily different from the product topology
because the product topology is not metrizable.

## [[Continuity (topology)|Continuity]] and [[Convergence (topology)|convergence]]

Let $X$ be a set with topology induced by maps $\{f_i : X \rightarrow X_i\}$.
$f : Y \rightarrow X$ is continuous
$\iff$ $f_j \circ f : Y \rightarrow X_j$ is continuous for all $j \in I$.
In product topology this means $f : Y \rightarrow \prod_{i \in I} X_i$ is continuous
iff all its coordinates are continuous.

Let $(x_n)_{n=1}^{\infty} \subset X$ be a [[sequence]] (with $X$ the previously defined space).
$(x_n)$ converges to $x \in X$
$\iff$ $f_i(x_n) \longrightarrow f_i(x)$ for all $i \in I$.
In product topology this means $x$ is a limit of $(x_n)$
iff all its coordinates are limits of the coordinate sequences.

###### Proof
Let $X$ be a topological space with topology induced by $\{f_i : i \in I\}$.

"$\implies$": Let $(x_n) \subset X$ s.t. $x_n \longrightarrow x \in X$.
Now all $f_i$ are continuous and therefore sequentially continuous,
implying $f_i(x_n) \longrightarrow f_i(x)$ for all $i \in I$.

"$\impliedby$": Let $(x_n) \subset X$ s.t. $f_i(x_n) \longrightarrow f_i(x)$ for all $i \in I$.
Want: $x_n \longrightarrow x$ meaning for all neighborhoods $U$ of $x$
exists $N \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $n \geq N \implies x_n \in U$.
Instead of all neighborhoods it suffices to consider basis elements $B \in \mathcal{B}$
because by definition of basis $\exists\, B \in \mathcal{B}$ s.t. $x \in B \subset U$.
$\mathcal{B}$ consists of finite intersections of preimages of $f_i$s so we can write
$B = \bigcap_{j=1}^{m} f_{i_j}^{-1}[U_{i_j}]$, $i_j \in I$. Also recall that $x \in B$.
Now $x \in f_{i_j}^{-1}[U_{i_j}]$ for all $j = 1, \dots, m$ $\implies f_{i_j}(x) \in U_{i_j}$
$\implies \exists\, N_j \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $n \geq N_j \implies f_{i_j}(x_n) \in U_{i_j}$.
Now let $N = \max\{N_1, \dots, N_m\}$.
Then $n \geq N \implies f_{i_j} \in U_{i_j}$ for all $j = 1, \dots, m$
$\implies x_n \in f_{i_j}^{-1}[U_{i_j}]$ for all $j$
$\implies x_n \in \bigcap_{j=1}^{m} f_{i_j}^{-1}[U_{i_j}] = B$
meaning $x_n$ converges to $x$ in the product topology, which is what we wanted.
